---
title: "Does God Exist"
date: 2018-03-27
draft: false
hero_image: "does-god-exist.jpg"
description: ""
---

A colleague of mine was telling me about her experience with God. She was a middle-aged woman and an avid follower of Christ. I find her stories encouraging but also very surreal. Being a Christian too, I do witness small miracles in my life but I have yet felt God's presence as strongly as her descriptions. It then begs the question, could one really feel, see and hear God? Is there any experiment that is able to prove God exist?

It all started at a very young age when I was exposed to the concept of religion. Being born a Taoist, my very first experience with a divine being was in a nearby temple that my parents worship. I was made to carry joss sticks and the smoke that came out of them stung my eyes. I remember leaving the temple tearing from the dust irritants in the air.

I could vaguely remember my dad telling me the names of the different deities and their respective roles they play in maintaining law and order in heaven, earth, and hell. As I held the joss sticks, facing the giant statue in front of me, I was asked to close my eyes and to give thanks and pray for good health, good grades and to have a smooth sailing life. The trip to the temple would end with a small donation and us taking home some holy water with flower petals in it. We would subsequently shower with the holy water.

"Pa. So now that we have prayed to 佛祖 (Buddha), does that mean we don't need study le?" My brother and I asked. "No. No escaping studying!" My dad exclaimed. "Ah..." we sulked. "Then we pray for what?" "We pray for the things we can't control." Dad replied.

So what really happens when we close our eyes and pray? Is there really a God up there listening to our woes and requests? I used to imagine that my words of prayers are channeled through the smoke from the joss sticks, reaching out to the deity I was praying to. Like an SMS or page or an email. I would get pretty upset when temple helper clears away my joss sticks shortly after I have placed it. I would complain to my dad saying that my prayer has not sent finish yet.

# Borobudur Temple
While touring central Java during the summer holidays of my sophomore year, I was greeted by the majestic structure of the Borobudur. There were many small stupas and statues of Buddha built about the single central large stupa, which when viewed from above, takes the form of a Buddhist mandala, representing [Buddhism cosmology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buddhist_cosmology) and the nature of mind. Beautifully sculptured on the walls were stories of Gautama Buddha, depicting his birth till him achieving Nirvana by meditating under the Bodhi Tree. As we ascend up each platform, we reached a higher level of enlightenment until we finally arrived at Nirvana.

A Buddhist friend of mine once told me about his worldview on Heaven, Earth and Hell. He believes that they are nothing but different states of the mind. He mentioned that Heaven exists because Hell exists. Very much like how light gives birth to darkness. When there is a place with happiness or pleasure, there is sadness or sufferings. He also introduced to me the concept of karma and reincarnation, which I found really novel and refreshing.

# Confirmation Bias
Before baptism, the incoming, confirming Christians would share a short testimony about their walk with Christ. They were all personal and inspiring, however, very susceptible to confirmation bias.

Confirmation bias is the mother of all misconceptions and is innate in us (watch this [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vKA4w2O61Xo) by Derek Muller). It causes us to observe and interpret new information so that they are compatible with our worldview and beliefs. Confirmation bias also causes us to filter out any new information which contradicts. When questioning an analyst about his/her market model, how many times have you heard him/her saying, "Ah! This is just an exception, an outlier!" when his/her prediction went horribly wrong? We Christians also tend to comfort ourselves when life takes a bad turn by saying things like, "God would reveal His way in due time. Never stop believing in Him." This is a potentially dangerous practice as it could cause us to be delusional. We might not be able to differentiate the true God from other false pretenses. It is important that we are aware of this confirmation bias and take precautions of the "special cases". We should face anomalies with confidence and not rejections. At the end of the day, the Truth is not afraid of questions.

# Design and not by chance
A popular worldview about the birth of the Universe is the theory of Big Bang. With early stardusts scattered across the cosmos, guided by Brownian motion, coupled with early day forces and an extremely long period of time, therein lies a remote possibility of me typing this blog post today. Current science does seem to point to the boundary conditions of the Universe being fine-tuned, as though it has been carefully engineered to allow life. The design of Earth also seemed to have taken in considerations of certain conditions such as size, mass and distance from the sun lying us in the [Goldilocks Zone](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circumstellar_habitable_zone). All these seems too much to be mere coincidence! I am taking sides with the worldview that there is a higher and vastly more intelligent being out there who designed the Universe to be like that.

Maybe there is a fundamental limit, a maximum extent to which our brain is unable to comprehend and theorize this complex world that we live in. In quantum mechanics, the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle states the fundamental limit to which how accurately we could measure a quantity. This is illustrated by experiments which demonstrate the trade-offs between the accuracies of position and momentum. Many theories regarding the physical laws have changed and evolved to fit new discoveries as we slowly learn more about our Universe. General Relativity revolutionized our thinking of gravity and demolished the assumption of absolute time and space. Neutrinos were discovered to have mass and some natural occurring processes were found to violate the symmetry of charge, parity and time. However, there is one hypothesis written a few thousand years ago that has withstood this test of time. It has never been changed or evolved, just merely adapted to different languages and printed billions of times over. That is the Word of the Lord. It isn't a theory as it cannot be proven nor disproven. To me, it is more like a story written in an ancient language which serves as a guiding beacon to our daily living. It fills the gaps in the knowledge that our brain may be unable to fathom.

So does God exist? Yes, I believe He does. There is no experiment to show for it but in your faith, He exists. He lives in your faith in Him.